# Data Lake with Spark

## Project introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project Description
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. You'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

## Project Dataset

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

### Database schema design
In this project I am going to create 2 dimension tables based on log dataset:
- 1. ```songs``` contains data related with songs like song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
- 2. ```artists``` contains data related with artists like artist_id, artist_name, artist_location, artist_latitude and artist_longitude. 

Then I will create another 2 dimension tables based on song dataset:
- 1. ```users``` contains data related with users of Sparkify such like userId, firstName, lastName,gender, level
- 2. ```time``` contains data from the timestamp of each user login the app, time data like year, month, day, weekday, week, hour and start time.

After creating individual table I like to use star schema to create one fact table to join log dataset and song dataset
- ```songplays``` table will contains part of the data from song, artists, users and time table data.

## Before Running the Pipeline
Understand What files we are going to use:
- 1. ```etl.py``` reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3
- 2. ```dl.cfg``` contains your AWS credentials
- 3. ```README.md``` provides discussion on your process and decisions
    
## Running ETL Pipeline
- 1. Created tables to store the data from S3 buckets.
- 2. Loading the data from S3 buckets to staging tables in the Redshift Cluster.
- 3. Inserted data into fact and dimension tables from the staging tables.
