# Data Modeling with PostgreSQL

## Project introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project Description
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, you will need to define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

## Project Dataset

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

* Fact Table
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

* Dimension Tables
**users** - users in the app
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
**songs** - songs in music database
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
**artists** - artists in music database
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Schema design and ETL pipeline
The star schema has 1 fact table (songplays), and 4 dimension tables (users, songs, artists, time). ```DROP```, ```CREATE```, ```INSERT```, and ```SELECT``` queries are defined in ```sql_queries.py```. ```create_tables.py``` uses functions ```create_database```, ```drop_tables```, and ```create_tables``` to create the database sparkifydb and the required tables.

Extract, transform, load processes in etl.py populate the songs and artists tables with data derived from the JSON song files, ```data/song_data```. Processed data derived from the JSON log files, ```data/log_data```, is used to populate time and users tables. A SELECT query collects song and artist id from the songs and artists tables and combines this with log file derived data to populate the songplays fact table.